Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is
part three, our final part, of our
mini series on the Cambridge Five:
the spy ring that infiltrated the
upper echelons of Britain’s political
and intelligence worlds and leaked
state secrets to the Soviet Union.
In case you missed them, in part one we
set the scene, learned about who these men
really were, and how they were recruited.
In part two, we learned about the true
extent of their success, how they managed
to get away with it for so long, and saw
some clues about where things might start
to go wrong, some chinks in their armour.
And in today’s episode, part three,
we’ll see how this story ends.
OK then, let’s get into it and
talk about the downfall and
defection of the Cambridge Five.
It was May 1951.
Kim Philby held a telegram in his
hands, a look of horror on his face.
The Americans, he realised, had
discovered one of the Cambridge Five.
Several years beforehand, Philby,
the first of the Cambridge
Five to be recruited, had
been sent to Washington D.C.
Although publicly he was working at
the British Embassy, in reality he was
the most senior British intelligence
officer in Washington, or rather, in
even more reality, he was a double
agent working for the Soviets.
As you heard in episode two, by the
late-1940s both the British and the
Americans were becoming suspicious that
there was a mole - that is, that someone
was leaking information to the Soviets.
As part of his role, Philby, himself
a Soviet double agent, of course,
was involved in this investigation.
There was or had been, the Americans
believed, a mole working in the
British embassy in Washington
some time in the mid-1940s.
To Philby’s horror, by the spring of
1951 he realised that the Americans had
cracked the Soviets' transmission codes.
They knew who the mole had
been: a double agent referred
to by the Soviets as ‘Homer’.
If you remember from part one, Homer
was the cryptonym, the code name, of
Philby’s friend, university colleague,
and fellow double agent, Donald Maclean.
In the mid to late-1940s, Maclean
had indeed worked in Washington and
leaked incredibly sensitive information
about the West’s nuclear capabilities.
He had since been sent back to
London and put under surveillance,
one of several suspects.
Then, on the 16th of May, Philby received
the telegram that set in motion the
start of the end for the Cambridge Five.
The intelligence services back in
London, it seemed, were about to
take Maclean in for questioning.
Maclean, he knew, was in an
increasingly weak mental state.
Philby was terrified he would crack
under pressure and give up the
identities of the rest of the five.
Time was running out,
the net was tightening.
What would Philby do?
How would he get word back to Maclean
in London without arousing suspicion
in Washington, as he supposedly led
the very investigation into the mole?
The responsibility would
fall, unfortunately, onto the
shoulders of the unpredictable
and erratic drunk, Guy Burgess.
Now, as a quick reminder, Burgess was
one of the five high-flying Cambridge
graduates who had gone on to become
a double agent for the Soviets.
He had joined the Foreign Office,
while his fellow spies had held
other high-powered positions
in the British establishment.
They had passed literally thousands
of documents full of classified
material to the Soviets, everything
from nuclear secrets to the identities
of British spies working in Europe.
Fast forward to the early 1950s,
these men became careless; complacent
and sloppy in their spycraft.
And a not insignificant part of
this complacency and sloppiness
can be traced back to alcohol.
Though Burgess was known as the
biggest drinker of the lot, the
heaviest drinker, in the spring of
1950 Maclean too had descended into
a downward spiral of alcoholism
after being transferred to Cairo.
His drinking got so out of
control that he was sent back to
London in disgrace for desk duty.
He was a shadow of his former
self, and Philby was understandably
petrified that he would crack under
pressure, that he would reveal all
if he was taken in for questioning.
Time was running out.
And warning Maclean directly
would have been too obvious, of
course, he was under surveillance.
So, what did Philby do?
He realised he would have to rely
on the unpredictable Burgess.
By then, Burgess was also working in
Washington DC and living with Philby.
As you might remember from episode two,
Burgess was hardly the most reliable
of the Five, and was well-known as a
careless alcoholic with a big mouth,
someone who talked a lot and didn’t seem
particularly good at keeping secrets.
But he was the only way to get a
message back to Maclean in London.
There was a spanner in the works, an
immediate problem, when Burgess was
caught speeding in his car by the
American police, and found to be drunk.
He claimed diplomatic immunity
and was kicked out of the country.
This caused something of a diplomatic
scandal, but it has been suggested
that this was all part of the plan,
that Burgess did this on purpose
in order to be able to warn Maclean
without seeming overly-suspicious.
Nonetheless, he eventually arrived back
in London later on in May and contacted
his Soviet handlers to warn them that
the Americans were onto Maclean and
that he would be questioned any day.
Incredibly, after Burgess saw the
mental state of Maclean and his
uncontrollable drunken behaviour,
he decided that if Maclean was going
to escape, he wouldn’t be able to do
it alone, Burgess would go with him.
This really was, as the expression
goes, the blind leading the blind.
But where would they go?
By late May, Philby’s fears were
confirmed and British intelligence
had indeed decided they were going to
confront Maclean about their suspicions.
Remember, Philby at this time was
a top-ranking counterespionage
officer, so he had a front-row seat
to all of these investigations.
Monday 28th was the day he would
be brought in for questioning.
When Philby got wind, or heard about this,
he warned Burgess, sending him a telegram.
With time running out, on the 25th of May,
Burgess bought two ferry tickets, and he
and Maclean took an overnight ferry from
Southampton to Saint-Malo, in France.
The two had breakfast, with beer, of
course, and paid a taxi driver to drive
them to Rennes, the capital of Brittany.
From there they took a train to Paris,
then continued onto Zurich where they
received papers from the Soviet Embassy,
took a flight to Prague, and disappeared.
They had defected to the Soviet
Union, disappeared behind the
Iron Curtain, and would not be
heard from again for five years.
With the British and Americans wondering
how Maclean had realised they were onto
him, suspicion immediately fell on Philby,
given his relationship with Burgess
and knowledge of the investigation.
Philby was recalled to London
and interrogated by MI6.
MI6 were sure that Philby was the
man, the link between Burgess and
Maclean, but with no hard evidence,
Philby faced no charges but was instead
asked to retire quietly from MI6.
As you might imagine, the whole saga
caused outrage in Washington and
seriously damaged British and American
relations at a key time in the Cold War.
So, two of the Cambridge Five had
been discovered, but they were
safely behind the Iron Curtain.
Now all eyes were on Philby, but
neither MI5 nor MI6 had the concrete
evidence to pin anything on him, to
prove that he had done anything wrong.
They knew he had access to top secret
files, including the ones about the
mole, and that he had been living with
Burgess, the man who had just travelled
to London and then disappeared with
Maclean, the man they suspected was Homer.
Clearly, all signs pointed to
him, but he was still a free man.
After leaving MI6, he went to
Beirut to work as a journalist,
while still maintaining the support
of many of his MI6 colleagues.
Like Burgess and Maclean, Philby
was by now a full-blown alcoholic
and spent much of his time in
bars around the British embassy.
Some believe he even did the
occasional bit of spywork for MI6,
despite their suspicions about him.
Anyway, in December of 1961 a high-ranking
KGB officer defected to the West and
provided clues that confirmed the
long-held suspicions about Philby
being the ‘third man’ and his role
in tipping off Maclean and Burgess.
And when a trusted source told MI6
that Philby had tried to recruit
her years before, MI6 made its move.
Now MI6 thought it had enough evidence to
try and get a full confession from Philby,
so in 1963 a man called Nicholas Elliott,
one of Philby’s old school friends,
was sent to Beirut to confront him.
It didn’t take long for Philby to
confess in writing that he was a double
agent, but a few days later, on the
23rd of January, he boarded a Soviet
ship bound for Odessa and disappeared.
The third of the Cambridge
Five had defected.
Now, some have suggested that
Philby was allowed to defect to
avoid even more embarrassment for
the British intelligence community.
Whatever the truth, the fact that it
was Philby’s school friend that was
sent and not a proper interrogator,
goes to the heart of the ‘good old
chap’ culture that allowed Philby to
exist as a double agent for so long.
He was a gentleman, so naturally
having an old school friend go and
talk to him was the appropriate action,
instead of police officers or soldiers.
Let’s remember, he was accused of
committing treason, which is legally
one of the worst crimes possible.
And he was allowed to slip away
quietly to the Soviet Union.
But instead of receiving the hero's
welcome that he expected, when he arrived
in the Soviet Union Philby was put in
a flat in Moscow and shunned, rejected
by Soviet intelligence, who had always
been suspicious of how Philby had risen
so quickly in MI6 and even feared he was
a triple agent working for the British.
In 1988 he died of
heart failure in Moscow.
So, what came of the other two defectors
- Burgess and Maclean, the other two
men who had fled to the Soviet Union?
Maclean integrated into Soviet
society, he went by the name of Comrade
Madzoevsky and he lived a life of
luxury compared to the average Soviet.
He died in Moscow in March of
1983, and he was described in his
obituary by the Russian newspaper
Izvestia as “a man of high moral
qualities and a convinced communist".
Burgess, on the other hand, did
not receive such a hero’s welcome.
He did not learn Russian, and as
a result he became increasingly
isolated after his defection.
He spent most of his time alone,
drinking and reading, and, perhaps
unsurprisingly, he died of liver
failure on the 30th of August in 1963.
So, what of the two other
members, Blunt and Cairncross?
Well, though both men had provided
vital information to the Soviets
during the Second World War,
they both did significantly less
spying after the Second World War
than Philby, Burgess and Maclean.
This seems to have been partly
ideological, with Blunt in
particular losing faith in
socialism, and partly practical.
Whereas the other three all continued
rising through the ranks in the diplomatic
and intelligence worlds, Blunt and
Cairncross focused more on academia and
had less access to top secret information.
I should say that even after Philby
defected, in 1963, it wasn’t yet publicly
known, that there were five double agents.
British intelligence did have its
suspicions about Blunt in particular and
knew he had been good friends with Burgess
since Cambridge, even suspecting that
he had helped him and Maclean defect.
But no way of proving it.
Even without proof, the net
was closing on the two men.
After a handwritten note from Burgess was
found in Cairncross’ flat in 1951, and
following Burgess and Maclean’s defection,
Cairncross had been interrogated by
MI5 but denied he was a Soviet spy.
However, after Philby’s defection in
1964, Cairncross was questioned by
MI5 again, and this time, he confessed
that he was indeed a spy, but in
exchange for providing information
he was not prosecuted and his role
in the spy ring was kept a secret.
Instead he went to the United States and
began a career as a literary scholar,
and he wouldn’t be revealed as the
so-called ‘fifth man’ for many years.
Anthony Blunt confessed when questioned
the same year, but was not publicly
revealed as the ‘fourth’ of the
Cambridge Five until 1979, when
someone he had tried to recruit at
Cambridge in the 1930s told their story.
The Queen was told that her high-ranking
employee had been a double agent but,
incredibly, Blunt was allowed to keep his
job as Surveyor of the Queen’s Pictures.
He even kept his knighthood, his
royal honour, until his spying
past was made public by the British
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
As a result, the Queen stripped
Blunt of his knighthood, and he died
in London in 1983 aged 75, without
spending as much as a night in prison.
You might be thinking, how  did they
manage to get away with it for so long,
and even after they were caught, why
were they not punished in any way?
Much of the answer to this comes
back to something we talked about
at the very beginning of this
mini-series: class and social status.
Because these men were from Britain’s
ruling elite with famous and
influential fathers, they studied
at Britain’s top university, worked
in its elite institutions, they
were given the benefit of the doubt,
that is, they were believed despite
evidence or suspicions against them.
Blunt was embedded in the Royal Family;
Burgess, Cairncross and Maclean the
political corridors of power; and
Philby was the very man entrusted
to fight against Soviet espionage.
Nobody expected that ‘one of their
own’ - ‘good chaps’ as we might say in
England - would betray their country,
and suspicions about them were ignored
for years because of their status.
Because of who they were, where
they went to school, and the elite
part of society they came from.
Another reason is that revealing the Five,
and therefore the weaknesses in British
intelligence, would have had damaging
consequences on the international stage.
The slow unmasking, or uncovering,
of the Cambridge Five was incredibly
embarrassing to the British establishment
and to the British security forces.
Not only did these men undermine and
actively work against the UK during
the Second World War and the Cold War,
but they brought into question the
entirety of British foreign policy.
The Cambridge Five shook the United
States’ confidence in the UK, and damaged
the transatlantic ‘special relationship’
at a time when cooperation was vital.
And as the Cold War moved on into the
1970s and 1980s, rumours and gossip
about the Cambridge Five contributed
to the paranoia consuming the country.
If men like the Cambridge Five would
betray their country, who wouldn’t?
How many of them really were there?
What if there weren’t just five, but
six, seven, ten, twenty, or fifty?
What if there were still double agents
working in the heart of government?
For years after, countless people were
accused of being the sixth or seventh
or eighth members of the Cambridge
spy ring, and many of their university
contemporaries were suspected.
None were found, or at least,
none have been publicly revealed.
If there were more, well if the example
of the original five is anything to go
by, they were probably hiding in the most
unexpected place, hiding in plain sight.
Ok then, that is it for today’s episode
on the Cambridge Five, one of the
most successful spy rings of all time.
I hope it was an interesting one, and
whether you knew a lot about them, or
this was the first time you’d heard
anything about the whole thing, well
I hope you learned something new.
As always, I'd love to know what
you thought about this episode.
Who do you think was the best, or
most effective, of the Cambridge Five?
Which of the men do you
find most interesting?
What do you think that their
long careers as double agents
says about British society?
I'd love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.